---
extends: _layouts.post
section: content
image: https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2020/09/29/22/33784204-0-image-a-82_1601416710684.jpg 
title: Britains Got Talent is hit by MORE Ofcom complaints 
description: It was reported that some viewers complained about magician Kevin Quantums act during Saturday nights show. 
date: 2020-09-29-23-00-29 
categories: [latest, tv] 
featured: true 
--- 
Britain's Got Talent has reportedly received complaints to Ofcom over a lack of social distancing during Saturday's show.

Judges Amanda Holden, Alesha Dixon, David Walliams and Ashley Banjo took part in magician Kevin Quantum's trick with Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly.

The trickster wanted the stars to help him break a glass with an electrical current which would be generated by human contact through a plasma globe, but the magic act required them to touch fingers.

Touching; Britain's Got Talent has been hit by MORE Ofcom complaints as viewers 'criticise show for a lack of social distancing during magic trick', it was reported on Tuesday

Prior to the trick, Kevin did ask all of the judges to sanitise their hands and made sure they stood at a two metre distance before they touched hands.

Despite doing this, some fans felt that it was against social distancing measures to allow the judges and co-hosts to touch hands, and took to Twitter to complain.

One user said: 'A bit hypocritical to have the judges sitting 2 metres apart and then get them on the stage touching each other. Hope they all washed their hands after.'

Act: Magician Kevin Quantum wanted the stars to help him break a glass with an electrical current which would be generated by human contact through a plasma globe

Staying safe: Prior to the trick, Kevin did ask all of the judges to sanitise their hands and made sure they stood at a two metre distance before they touched hands.

While another criticised: '#BGT so no social distancing on the show tonight, touching each other's fingers?'

Another viewer questioned: 'Surely they can't be touching each other?' 

The Sun reported on Tuesday that the regulatory board had received 19 complaints regarding the magic act.  

Britain's Got Talent producers told Metro on Saturday: 'We operate to comprehensive Covid-19 policies and film in compliance with the law including ensuring personal contact on stage is for the shortest time; hands are sanitised; equipment is disinfected; participants are not face to face and the studio is well ventilated. 













Unhappy: Despite doing this, some fans felt that it was against social distancing measures to allow the judges and co-hosts to touch hands, and took to Twitter to complain

'For Kevin's performance, hand sanitiser was used by him, the judges and Ant; props were disinfected; and any close contact was kept to a minimum.' 

MailOnline has contacted Ofcom and Britain's Got Talent representatives for further comment.

On Monday it was claimed Amanda had sparked Ofcom complaints once more from viewers, with 235 people contacting the company over her outfit from Saturday's show. 

The Heart Breakfast presenter wowed in a showstopping metallic navy gown during the fourth semi-final, but at the time some fans questioned if she had suffered a wardrobe malfunction after they claimed to 'see her nipples'.

Risque: On Monday, it was claimed Amanda had sparked Ofcom complaints once more from viewers, with 235 people contacting the company over her outfit

Racy: The Heart Breakfast presenter wowed in a showstopping metallic navy gown during the fourth semi-final, but some fans claimed they could 'see her nipples'

According to a report from The Mirror, the regulator received 277 complaints about the programme, with the majority focusing on her racy ensemble which featured a plunging neckline and was boned to accentuate her cleavage. 

The broadcaster told her Instagram followers on Tuesday: 'Mmmm really?! Who has nipples this close to their cleavage?! 

'FYI. A boned corset dented the girls all night', she ended her post alongside a series of fried egg emojis. 

Meanwhile Diversity's Black Lives Matter inspired performance during the show's first semi-final attracted 24,500 complaints to OfCom, who have since announced they will not investigate any further.

Controversy: Meanwhile, Diversity's dance earlier this month sparked 24,500 complaints but  Ofcom have since announced they will not investigate any further

ITV has 'stood with Diversity' as they featured adverts in national newspapers in support of the controversial dance. 

ITV are believed to have spent around £260,000 on the newspaper ads with full-page monochrome pieces in The Metro costing £36,461 and £27,700 in The Mirror. 

Alesha was one of many who praised ITV for standing by the dance troupe. The singer took to Instagram to share a snap of the advert and gushed over how 'proud' she was with them. 

In her caption, she wrote: 'Well done @ITV for standing with Diversity! Proud of you! This image is in all of the national newspapers today.'

Making a statement: ITV rolled out full-page ads in solidarity with Diversity as Ofcom complaints reach 24,500 over the groups BLM-inspired routine. Ashley pictured

Decision: A spokesperson for government-approved regulatory body Ofcom confirmed to MailOnline no action will be taken for Diversity's BLM-inspired routine 

Ashley also shared his gratitude with ITV for standing by Diversity over their Black Lives Matter-inspired performance. 

The poster showed a poignant black and white image of Ashley taking the knee alongside the words: 'We are changed by what we see. Just as we are changed when we are seen. ITV stand with Diversity.'

Sharing a snap of the same advert, which shows him kneeling in black-and-white, he wrote: 'This is what change looks like.

'@ITV stand with @Diversity and we've never been prouder. This is in all the national papers today. Thank you again to everyone that has supported us.'

Support: The broadcaster shared a statement on their Twitter page as the furore continued

