---
extends: _layouts.post
section: content
image: https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2020/04/04/16/26808842-0-image-a-150_1586015318282.jpg 
title: Mother self-isolating due to asthma gets angry note from neighbour telling her to keep her son quiet 
description: Single mother Lauren McCabe, 26, received a latter from her downstairs neighbour asking her to keep Leo, her two-year-old son quiet while she self-isolates with asthma and weakened immune system 
date: 2020-03-02 
categories: [ps4] 
featured: true 
--- 
A mother self-isolating in the coronavirus lockdown had a note pushed through her door asking her to keep her young son quiet.Lauren McCabe was asked to 'reduce the running around' as it was waking neighbours early in the morning.The 26-year-old, who has asthma and a low immune system after catching shingles, was devastated - so wrote a note back in her two-year-old son Leo's name.It said: 'I no longer go to nursery or get to see the people I'm used to spending time with. My mummy isn't very well, she said we have to stay home 'til she is better.         Single mother Lauren McCabe and her two-year-old son Leo were asked to 'reduce the running around' be their downstairs neighbours as she self-isolates with asthma and a weakened immune system during coronavirus lockdown            RELATED ARTICLES  Previous 1 Next       Family reveal traumatic final moments of father who told...    Picture of selflessness: Meet the eight carers who left...     
       
            
                
                  Share this article
                  Share
                
            
    'My mummy doesn't want me to feel anxious or upset with these changes to my normal routine. So she's finding ways for me to feel happy, like running around my living room, dancing in my living room, playing with my favourite toys in my living room.'I'm sorry you're finding this hard. I just want my mummy to be better and things to be normal.'          'I'm sorry you're finding this hard. I just want my mummy to be better and things to be normal,' read the letter written from two-year-old Leo         This is the letter McCabe received from her neighbour asking her to 'try and reduce the running around' as she self-isolates with asthma and a weakened immune system         WHAT ARE THE CORONAVIRUS SYMPTOMS?The virus, called COVID-19, is transmitted from person to person via droplets when an infected person breathes out, coughs or sneezes. It can also spread via contaminated surfaces such as door handles or railings. Coronavirus infections have a wide range of symptoms, including fever, coughing, shortness of breath and breathing difficulties.  Mild cases can cause cold-like symptoms including a sore throat, headache, fever, cough or trouble breathing.  Severe cases can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory illness, kidney failure and death.  Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure.  Single mother Lauren, a freelance make-up artist, wept after reading the original note, which was pushed through the door of her Birmingham flat. It read: 'We think you have a young child and it must hard keeping them entertained in a flat. 'Can we please ask that you try and reduce the running around as this is really loud. Especially early in the mornings where it wakes us up most days. Thanks in advance.'Lauren's mother, Sarah Burgess, said: 'I haven't seen her because she's in isolation, but she rang me sobbing, saying: 'Mum how am I meant to keep him quiet?'They should have found out the background before sending that note.'To try to calm the situation, Sarah and Lauren wrote the note from Leo which they put through a neighbour's door.Sarah said Leo was a 'typical toddler', but was not noisy, was easily pacified. And she said the row was the last thing the pair needed as they tried to keep their spirits up.'At the moment Lauren and Leo are stuck in the flat,' she said. 'I buy all their food for them and leave it outside their door, and the only time they get to go out is to sit on the lawn in front of the block.'         The UK has seen 41,903 total cases of the coronavirus, with 4,313 people dying from the illness       The number of deaths in the UK resulting from the coronavirus surpassed that of China yesterday (Friday) and has reached 4,313 cases in the country