---
extends: _layouts.post
section: content
image: https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2020/09/03/09/32725016-0-image-a-9_1599122714927.jpg 
title: Roma make breakthrough in bid to sign Chris Smalling from Manchester United 
description: Chris Smalling has wanted a permanent move ever since impressing in Rome, and now looks to be a step closer after the Italians primed their opening bid in hope of concluding a swift deal with Man United. 
date: 2020-09-03-09-53-51 
categories: [latest, sports] 
featured: true 
--- 
Roma are said to finally be making a breakthrough in their attempts to permanently sign Chris Smalling from Manchester United.

The Italian giants have been working hard to secure a deal for the defender, despite the apparent reluctance of United to sell.

And now Roma have at least made some headway with a bid of £18million plus bonuses being prepared to be sent over to Old Trafford, according to Sky Sports Italia.

Roma are working on an improved deal to seal the permanent signing of Chris Smalling

Following a loan switch to Serie A Smalling gained critical acclaim, following an impressive rise in form in his 37 games, which included three goals.

United were understood to be holding out for a fee of £20m for the 30-year-old, but are tipped to do business depending on the quality of Roma's added bonuses in the deal.

Smalling's United days look to be over after impressing during his loan spell in Serie A

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer would use funds generated by Smalling's sale to continue overhauling

United boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer is looking to bolster his defensive line this summer if possible, in order to tighten the ranks ahead of next season.

RB Leipzig star Dayot Upamecano has already been linked with a move to Old Trafford, though Arsenal and Manchester City are also said to hold an interest in the 21-year-old.

The youngster has a £38m release clause in his new deal at Leipzig but it cannot be triggered until next summer, meaning United would be forced to pay a hefty sum to lure him away. 

